

## Project:
The COVID-19 outbreak was characterized as a pandemic by the WHO on March 11, 2020. As the new epidemic Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) spreads, there has been a lot of research for better understanding on the effects of the virus. We can help the global community and researchers to better understand the disease by sharing insights derived from datasets which are available in Kaggle. We used the publicly available COVID-19 related datasets from sources like Johns Hopkins, United Nations and many others. Since data clustering is one of the useful unsupervised learning that groups data into clusters, we decided to use clustering methods, K-means and GMM, to group similar countries together so that we get insight into finding the similar attributes and hidden patterns of COVID-19 clusters
Introduction and Related Work

We are attempting to analyse how we could effectively group different countries based on various features like health conditions of people, nourishment levels, testing done, access to healthcare etc. by using 2 different clustering algorithms, K-Means and Expectation Maximization using Gaussian Mixture Models. We are also trying to find out which factors are affecting Covid-19 cases the most and analyse how the top 5 factors are affecting the Covid-19 cases in different countries.


## Results:

This experiment identified the top factors that indicated a higher ratio of confirmed COVID-19 cases: current health expenditure per capita, test ratio, HDI, informed risk, and mortality rate under 5. We showed the necessity of scaling the data to similar magnitudes in order to give the different factors an even weight in clustering. By looking at the elbow curve of the sum of squared differences between data points and their clusters, we were able to find 5 clusters to be the optimal number of clusters for our data. The mutual information regression of the ratio of confirmed cases against the other factors allowed us to identify current health expenditure per capita and the ratio of confirmed cases as the best factors to visualize our clusters on. We utilized K-Means clustering by scaling the top factors in order to visually group countries and analyze the similarities between them. We were able to recognize the patterns among the groups by finding the averages of these factors to compare the clusters. Furthermore, we used GMM clustering as an additional baseline and found related clustering results, conclusive enough that further exploration of dissimilar baselines and features can help in more explicit and generalised clusters of countries.
